---
title: "CodeBook"
author: "Hellen Gakuruh"
date: "Wednesday, June 17, 2015"
output: html_document
---

The Experiment(Study)
-----------------------
The data is from an experimental study called 'Human Activity Recognition' using Smartphones carried out by a leading smartphone company - Samsung, for it's Galaxy S II phone.

The experiment involved 30 volunteers between 19-48 years. It involved axial linear acceration and axial anagular velocity(accelerometer and gyroscope) for six activities. These activities included; walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing and laying. The dataset was then randomized into two groups, the training group (70%) and the test groups (30%).

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) was collected in what can be considered as a 2.56sec interval for a length of 50 thereby giving a total of 128 readings for each activity and participant. These results were used to generate summary statistics called features.

The Dataset
------------

The data provide in a zipped folder contained data on the two sensors grouped by their randomization category i.e. Train and Test.

Data Transformation
------------------

On careful inspection of the folder preseted, it was clear that the files necessary to accomplish the task were the x_train and X_test files that contained the datasets for the two randomization groups, the y_train and y_test which contained the activity lables, the subject file that contained information for each subject and the features file which cntained the summary statistics for each activity.

With that established, the first step involved preparation of the two datasets for merging. This involved reading in the files, adding column names to the datasets from the features file and subsequently extracting a dataframe with only two summary statistics i.e. mean and standard deviations for the three sensor signals (accelerometer) categories (x, y, z).

Merging was then performed and activity column converted into a factor variable with its labels. 

The final step of producing a tidy dataset involved:
       
* Adding a factor variable representing the randomization group for each  subject
* Averaging the three sensor categories for each group and each subject
* Combining the three sensor categories for each participant and activity
* Finaly the tidy dataset was generated by binding the subject, group and activities variables.

The Tidy data Variable
----------------------

The dataset has 30 observations or rows and 14 variables or columns. The observations are information on each subject.

The variables (columns) are:

1. Subject: Unique identifier for the subject and the primary key
2. Group : A factor variable indicating the randomization group for each subject
3. Walking_Mean: Average walking accelorometer sensor signals per subject
4. Walking_Std: Average standard deviation for walking sensor signal
5. WalkingUpStairs_Mean: Average walking upstairs accelorometer sensor signals per subject
6. WalkingUpStairs_Std: Average standard deviation for walking upstairs sensor signal
7. WalkingDownStairs_Mean: Average walking downstairs accelorometer sensor signals per subject
8. WalkingDownStairs_Std: Average standard deviation for walking downstairs sensor signal
9. Sitting_Mean: Average sitting accelorometer sensor signals per subject
10. Sitting_Std: Average standard deviation for sitting sensor signal
11. Standing_Mean:Average standing accelorometer sensor signals per subject
12. Standing_Std: Average standard deviation for standing sensor signal
13. Laying_Mean:Average laying accelorometer sensor signals per subject
14. Laying_Std: Average standard deviation for laying sensor signal










